THE (REAL) STORY OF SCOVILLE
Wilbur Scoville was born on January 22nd, 1865.
The world would never be the same. In 1912
Scoville developed the Scoville Organoleptic Test
(SOT), which was used to measure the “hotness”
of peppers. Scoville’s test is still used to measure
the capsaicin in a pepper, expressed as Scoville
Heat Units. Ever since, people have tried to breed
hotter and hotter peppers.

THE (FAKE) STORY OF SCOVILLE
The town of Scoville was founded in Wilbur’s honor
as a home for those who believe that the hottest
peppers are the best peppers. Every year around
this time, the town hosts the Scoville Chili Pepper
Festival. The festival includes fundraising
auctions for the local high school (Go Flames!),
a huge Farmers’ Market, incredible prizes for
growers who plant the fieriest peppers, and
the world famous Scoville Chili Cookoff,
where competitors try to scorch their way
to victory with the wildest concoctions.
The festival only lasts one day and the
grower that can generate the most heat
will take home this year’s trophy.
Are you ready to feel the burn?

COMPONENTS

MANY* PEPPER TOKENS

The peppers are everything. Plant them, harvest
them, crossbreed them, cash them in for points in
a variety of ways!

will assemble the board jigsaw-puzzle
1 GAME BOARD You
style from the four segments.

Farmers’ Market

Auction House

Chili Cookoff

Red

Yellow

Brown

White

Blue

Green

Orange

Purple

Black Phantom
*Peppers are technically unlimited in the game. If you run out
of a color you need, use something suitable as a substitute.

6 PLAYER SCREENS

For hiding your stuff from other players.

6 FARMERS

These guys move around
to harvest peppers.

Scoville City Hall

The Pepper Field

6 DISCS

These show
turn order.

Turn Order Track

65 AUCTION CARDS

48 MARKET CARDS

30 RECIPE CARDS

Players bid on these for extra peppers.
30 from the Morning and 35 from the
Afternoon batches.

Players can sell peppers for varying
rewards involving cash, peppers, and
points. 24 each from the Morning and
Afternoon batches.

Big points are available at the Chili
Cookoff by trading in the displayed
combination of peppers.

Item(s) up for auction

Peppers
wanted

Rewards

Peppers
needed

Point
value

12 AWARD
PLAQUES

A BUNCH
OF COINS

18 BONUS
ACTION TILES

4 BREEDING
CHARTS

Players can win these
for extra points by
planting the pepper
color shown.

Cash, in a variety of
denominations. Use
coins to bid for turn
order, and earn points
for your bankroll at the
end of the game.

Use these special actions on
your turn to get an edge on the
competition, or save them for
extra points at game end.

Keep these handy to remind yourself
how peppers combine to produce
hotter and more valuable peppers!
There’s a player aid on the back, too.

SETTING UP
A. General: Assemble the board in your play area. Make piles (separated by color) of the peppers nearby. Make a coin bank as well.
B. Players: Give each player a Screen and the farmer and disc in their color, one of each Bonus Action tile, $10 worth of coins,
and three peppers: red, yellow, and blue. Players should set up their screens to hide their stuff behind them during play.
C. Farmers’ Market: Shuffle the Morning deck of Market cards, then draw a number of cards according to your number of players
as shown on the board; lay them beside the board face up. Return the remainder of the Morning deck to the box, but shuffle the
Afternoon deck and keep it on the board where shown. (On the large square empty table.)
D. Chili Cookoff: Shuffle the deck of Recipe cards, then draw a number of cards according to your number of players as
shown on the board; lay them beside the board face up, overlapping them as shown to save room. It’s a good idea to
order them by score from lowest to highest as shown. Return the remainder of the Recipe deck to the box.
E. Auction House: Shuffle the Morning and Afternoon Auction decks and place them face down near the Auction House.
Draw cards equal to the number of players from the Morning deck and place them face up in the slots on the board.
Place the remainder of the Morning deck, plus the entire Afternoon deck, face down nearby.
F. City Hall: Separate the Award Plaques by pepper color and stack them in the matching spots on the roof
of City Hall, making sure that higher-valued plaques are on top of lower-valued plaques. If this is a 2p or
3p game, remove one plaque (the most valuable plaque) from each stack and return those to the box.
G. Starting Plots: Take a red, a yellow, and a blue cube into your hand. Randomly choose two of those to place
on the Starting Plots of the pepper field (marked with green outlines). Return the third pepper to the supply.
H. Turn Order: Take each player’s disc and randomly place them onto spots on the Turn Order Track. Do not
use any spots on the track numbered higher than the number of players. (For example in a 3p game, don’t use
the 4, 5, and 6 spaces; you might want to place a coin on unusable spaces as a reminder.)
I. Breeding Charts: Keep these handy so that players can refer to them.
The example below shows a setup for a 3-player game.
Throughout the rules examples, we will call our Green player
“Greg”, our Red player “Ruth”, and our Yellow player “Yuri”.

GAMEPLAY
Each game of Scoville consists of a variable number of rounds. Each round is made of these five phases:

1. AUCTION (Players bid for turn order and claim Auction cards.)
2. PLANTING (Players plant peppers and can win Award Plaques.)
3. HARVESTING (Players move their Farmers up to 3 steps, breeding peppers as they go.)
4. FULFILLMENT (Players may fulfill a Market card, fulfill a Recipe, and sell one pepper color.)
5. TIME CHECK (Check if Morning has progressed to Afternoon... or Afternoon to Endgame.)

1. AUCTION

In the Auction phase, all players bid coins for choice of turn order, then in turn order they claim Auction cards.

BIDDING FOR TURN ORDER
Note: There is no bid for turn order in the very first round of
the game; turn order was randomly established during Setup. In
all other rounds, players will be bidding for turn order.
First slide the discs off the turn order track up onto the faint circles
above, preserving the turn order from the previous round.
To bid, each player secretly selects any amount of their own
coins (including possibly zero) and holds it in their hand. When
all players are ready, everyone simultaneously reveals their bids.

Example: The bids are revealed. Greg bid 7 while Ruth
and Yuri both bid 5. Greg chooses first. He wants to lead
in the Harvesting phase—which works in reverse turn
order—so he chooses space 3.

The player who bid the highest chooses their spot on the
turn order track and moves their disc there, then the nexthighest bidder, and so on until everyone has chosen their
spot. Players pay their bids into the bank as they go.

Ruth and Yuri’s bids tied, so they choose in the previous
round’s turn order. Ruth chooses space 1, so Yuri (left
with no choice) ends up in space 2.

• In the event of a tied bid (of greater than zero), the tied player
who was earlier in the previous turn order chooses first.
• Players who bid zero do not get to choose their spot on the
track. After every player who bid greater than zero has chosen,
zero-bidders drop down (in previous turn order) into the available
spaces on the track, from lowest-numbered to highest.

CLAIMING AUCTION CARDS
In the new turn order, each player chooses one of the cards
currently in the Auction House. The player takes the pepper(s)
shown on the card from the supply and discards the card.

The new turn order is Ruth, Yuri, Greg. Ruth chooses the
purple pepper card, then Yuri chooses the yellow + blue
pepper card, then Greg takes the remaining red pepper card.
Each player discards their card and takes the shown pepper
from the supply. Then the Auction house is refreshed with
three new cards from the Morning draw deck.

After all players have chosen, draw new cards from the deck to refill
the Auction House. (Use the Morning deck if it’s still Morning, Afternoon
deck if it’s Afternoon.) In the rare event that the deck runs out, shuffle
the discards (of the appropriate deck) to form a new deck.

2. PLANTING
In the Planting phase, all players (in turn order) must plant one
pepper. To plant a pepper, the player selects any pepper from their
own supply and places it in an empty plot of the pepper field.
• A player’s pepper may only be planted in a plot that is horizontally
or vertically adjacent to a plot that already has a pepper in it.

Example: Ruth goes first. She could plant one of
her peppers in any of the spots marked with a
checkmark. The spots with red Xs on them are not
legal because they are not horizontally or vertically
adjacent to a planted plot.
Ruth eventually
decides to plant
her purple pepper
in the spot shown.

• A player may plant one extra pepper by using a certain
Bonus Action tile. (See Bonus Action Tiles for details.)

AWARD PLAQUES
If a player plants a pepper of a color for which any Award plaques still
remain on City Hall, the player may collect the most valuable of those
plaques. (Plaques should be stacked with the most valuable on top.)
• The plaques with the striped pepper on them refer to the
planting of a Purple or Orange or Green pepper.
• A maximum of one plaque may be earned by each player per
round, even if the player uses the Bonus Action tile to plant a
second pepper that would also qualify for a plaque.

Example: Ruth planted a purple pepper, and there are
still purple/orange/green plaques on City Hall. Ruth
claims the most-valuable matching plaque, earning
herself an easy two points!

• A player may earn more than one plaque of the same color,
providing that they are earned in different rounds.

3. HARVESTING

In the Harvesting phase, each player (in reverse turn order) moves their
farmer up to three steps along the plot paths, earning a pepper for each
step ending between two planted plots.

plot

paths

notch directly
between plots
A and B

• In the first round, each player on their turn first places their farmer
on the star, (facing either direction) then begins their movement.
In later turns, farmers begin their movement from wherever they sit.
• Farmers may move up to three steps but must move at least one step.
One step consists of sliding the farmer along the paths between the
plots until the farmer is in the notches directly between two plots
(or in the notch beside a plot if traveling along the outside edge of the
field). It is irrelevant whether the plots are planted or not.
• Farmers may not pass through nor stop on an opponent’s farmer.
(In the rare case that a farmer is totally blocked and can not move even
one step, the player must skip their turn in this Harvesting phase.)

Example: It’s Greg’s turn, and it’s the first round.
He places his farmer pawn on the star and begins.

• A farmer may be pivoted at the start of a turn to start moving in any
direction, but once it has begun movement it may not be “turned
around” to face the opposite direction. Because of this it will not be
possible to move along any portion of path already traveled this turn.

Step 1 takes him between an empty plot and a
yellow pepper, so he harvests nothing.

• When a farmer’s step ends between two planted plots, the
farmer harvests a pepper. The player collects a pepper (or
peppers) according to the Breeding chart.
• See Crossbreeding on the next page to learn how to read the
Breeding chart to harvest better and hotter peppers!

(This initial placement on the star is not a “step”;
the player doesn’t harvest anything.)

Step 2 takes him between an orange and
purple pepper, so he checks the Breeding
chart; he harvests a white pepper!
Step 3 takes him between two orange
peppers. Checking the chart again, he
sees that this earns him a black pepper!
Next round, his farmer will begin movement from
that spot between the two orange peppers.

CROSSBREEDING
When a farmer ends a step between two peppers, the player gets to crossbreed the peppers and collect the resulting pepper(s) from the supply.
Players will learn many of the combinations quite quickly, but its always
good to check the Breeding chart to confirm the crossbreeding results.
To use the Breeding chart, find one of the peppers in the left column of
the chart, then follow its row across until it reaches the other pepper’s
column. The place where the row and column meet display the result of
the crossbreed.
• Most combinations result in a single pepper for the player.
• Some combinations result in two peppers for the player.
• Some combinations (all involving brown peppers) result in an
X on the chart, which means the player collects no pepper.

Example 1: Your farmer is between two blue peppers.
The blue row and the blue column meet where shown;
you collect two blue peppers!
Example 2: Your farmer is between an orange and
purple pepper. The orange row and purple column meet
where shown; you collect a white pepper!
Example 3: Your farmer is between a brown and
orange pepper. The brown row and orange column
meet where shown; you collect nothing!

4. FULFILLMENT
In the Fulfillment phase, all players (in turn order) may perform any or all of the following actions. The player
may perform his or her actions in any order, but may only perform each action at most once per round.

VISIT THE FARMERS’ MARKET

The player may choose one Market card available in
the Farmers’ Market display. The player pays the
peppers shown on the “wanted” side of the card to
the supply, and earns the reward(s) shown on the
other side. The player keeps the Market card behind
his or her screen.

COMPETE AT THE CHILI COOKOFF
The player may choose one Recipe card available
in the Chili Cookoff display. The player pays the
combination of peppers shown on the card to
the supply, then keeps the Recipe card behind
his or her screen.

SELL A BATCH OF PEPPERS
The player may sell at most five of one
color of held peppers to the supply. Each
sold pepper earns $1 for every two of that
color pepper currently planted in the
pepper fields.

Example: Yuri chooses this Market
card from the display. He pays the
wanted yellow and orange peppers to
the supply, takes a brown pepper and
$3 from the supply, and keeps the
Market card behind his screen. It’ll
be worth 1 point at the end of the
game as shown.
Example: Yuri chooses this Recipe card
from the Chili Cookoff display. He pays
the 2 black, 2 brown, and 2 red peppers
shown on the card to the supply, and
keeps the Recipe card behind his screen.
This’ll be worth a huge 16 points at the
end of the game!

Example: Yuri could sell up to five of one color of
peppers that he holds. Considering the peppers that are
currently planted in the fields:
Red peppers are worth zero.
Purple peppers are worth zero.
Orange peppers are worth $1 each
Blue peppers are worth $1 each.
Yellow peppers are worth $2 each.
Yuri decides to sell 3 yellow peppers; he returns them
to the supply and collects $6 from the bank.

5. TIME CHECK

The game is divided into Morning and Afternoon. The game starts in the Morning, which is why the Morning
decks of Market and Auction cards were used during setup. The Time Check phase works as follows:

IF IT’S MORNING
First, count the number of Recipe cards remaining at the Chili Cookoff.
• If there are fewer cards than there are players (for example 2 or fewer in
a 3-player game), then the Afternoon is skipped. One more round is
played and the game ends after the Fulfillment phase of that round.
Note: This does not often happen in the Morning, but it is possible.

Then, count the number of Market cards remaining at the Farmers’ Market.
• If there are at least as many cards remaining as there are players
(for example 3 or more and it’s a 3-player game), then it is still morning.
Start a new round!

Example: In this 3-player game it’s
morning and we see that the Farmers’
Market is down to 1 card. This means that
next round is the start of Afternoon.

• If there are fewer cards than there are players, then the game
progresses to afternoon.
1. Discard any remaining morning Market cards from the Farmers’ Market,
then Draw new Market cards from the afternoon deck to refill the
Farmers’ Market to the same number that the game started with;
return the remainder of the afternoon Market deck to the box.
2. Return the morning Auction deck to the box, but leave the Auction
cards currently in the Auction house where they are; Start a new round!

We’ll discard the remaining Market card,
deal out 9 afternoon Market cards from the
deck (and get rid of the rest of the deck),
and get rid of the morning Auction deck.

IF IT’S AFTERNOON

Count the number of Market cards remaining at the Farmers’ Market,
and the number of Recipe cards remaining at the Chili Cookoff.
• If there are fewer cards than there are players in one of the two
locations, then one more round is played and the game ends after
the Fulfillment phase of that round.
• If there are fewer cards than there are players in both of the two
locations, then the game ends immediately with no final round played.
Otherwise, start a new round!

Example: In this 3-player game we see that the
Farmers’ Market is down to 2 cards, while the
Chili Cookoff still has 3. Since only one of the
locations has fewer cards than there are players,
we’ll play one final round and then end the game.

ENDGAME

When the game ends, each player
totals their own points. Points are
earned in five different categories:
Points on Market cards
Points on Recipe cards
Points on Award plaques
Points on the back of unplayed Bonus Action tiles
Every $3 = 1 point (ignore remainders)
The player with the greatest point total wins the
game! In the event of a tie, the tied player with the
most coins wins.

Example: At endgame, this player has 8 points worth of Market cards,
21 points worth of Recipe cards, 7 points worth of Award plaques,
one unused Bonus Action tile worth 4 points, and $17 which is worth
5 points. The player’s total is 8 + 21 + 7 + 4 + 5 = 45 points. Is that
enough to win the game? (Probably not... we are showing a low score
here so that the example’s math is clear... but it depends on what the
other players scored!)

BONUS ACTION TILES
Each player gets 3 Bonus Action tiles to start the game. These tiles are kept behind the player screens.
They may be played on the player’s turn to take advantage of the tile’s benefit, and are discarded when
played. (Players should discard the tiles face up in front of their own player screen so that everyone will be aware
of which tiles have been used.) A player may use multiple tiles on a turn if desired. Any tile still held at the
end of the game is worth 4 points to the player. (Points are shown on the tile backs.)
Play during your turn in the Planting phase to plant a second pepper of your choice,
following the normal planting rules. (Count the first pepper as an already-planted plot.)
If the first pepper earned you an Award plaque, then this second pepper is not eligible
to earn you an Award plaque even if it would normally qualify. (You may only earn one
plaque per round.) It is permitted to refuse a plaque from the first pepper in order to
claim a plaque from the second one.
Play during your turn in the Harvesting
phase to move a fourth step after you
have already reached your limit of three
steps. All normal movement and crossbreeding rules apply to this fourth step.
Play during your turn in the Harvesting
phase. This ability permits your farmer to
turn around once on this turn. (To be
clear, this does not add any steps to your
turn; it just allows your farmer to turn
around once only, and thus move over
portions of path already traveled this turn.)
Remember that you are may freely pivot
your farmer to face whatever direction you
want at the start of your turn.

Theoretically this could allow you to loop
all the way around a plot and end up
back where you started. You don’t break
the “no backtracking” rule because you
never actually retrace your own path.

Example: Greg starts where shown and moves
two steps. Since he is facing to the left, his next
move would normally take him to any of the three
spots marked with red dots. If he played the
Double Back Once tile, he could pivot to face the
opposite direction, and his next move would take
him to any of the spots marked with green circles.

CREDITS AND THANK YOUS
SCOVILLE GAME DESIGN
Ed Marriott

GAME DEVELOPMENT
Seth Jaffee

GRAPHIC DESIGN AND
RULES DEVELOPMENT

Published by Tasty Minstrel Games, L.L.C.
PO BOX 442 Morgan, Utah 84050
Copyright and Trademark 2014
Tasty Minstrel Games, L.L.C.
www.playtmg.com

Joshua Cappel

The designer would like to thank Michael Mindes & Seth Jaffee for working with a first time designer and taking a chance on me.
The designer would also like to thank the following people for providing feedback and desiring to make the game better:
James Slager, Jon McGee, David Felker, Gary Schweisthal, Dustin Foster, Brad & Kendra Hansen, Andrew & Kelley Marriott, Mark Wyse, Carl Klutzke, Espen
Klausen, Neil Roberts, Scott Metzger, Grant Rodiek, Chevee Dodd, Casey Clark, Brian Holt, Brett Myers, Francois Jolie, Ryan Metzler, Andrea Dexter, Nathanuil
Demille, Matt Worden, Tom Fennewald, Steve Dast, Peter Dast, Beth Van Maanen, Paul Texidor, Mark Tucker, Debbie Wudtke, Josh Wudtke, Paul & Elizabeth
Spurgis, Corey Young, J. Alex Kevern, Adam MacIver, Ben Rosset, Matthew O'Malley, Eric Leath, Jeff Large, David Chott, Matt Loomis, Brian Frahm, SDG.
And the designer would especially like to thank the Platinum Playtesters, without whom the game would not exist:
Erin Marriott, Jeremy "J" Van Maanen, Adam "A-Game" Buckingham, Ben "Bosun" McQuiston, Michael "Zeke" Lashua

